The duality of matter and radiation is traditionally framed as an intrinsic paradox of quantum systems. In part I, we propose it can be reinterpreted as a relational observer dependent-relative phe- nomenon. This relational resolution of wave–particle duality aligns with foundational experiments of quantum theory. The wave/particle behavior emerges from observer’s relative velocity/position with respect to the quantum entity under observation. The wave nature is precived by a rest- observer co-moving with the entity under observation. The particle nature is the relative view of a non co-moving observer with non-zero relative velocity.
Part-II Provides compelling evidence supporting the part-I claim. We revisit two foundational experiments–the Davisson–Germer electron scattering experiment (1927) and the Merli–Missiroli– Pozzi (MMP) biprism interference experiment (1976). By re-examining the conditions under which interference patterns emerge, it is argued that wave-particle duality behavior is not intrinsic to individual particles but arises from coherent ensembles of monoenergetic, indistinguishable quantum entities. This interpretation challenges conventional quantum narratives and offers a physically grounded and testable alternative to wave–particle duality.
Part III Discusses Measurement, Superposition, and Apparatus Coupling. We argue that the uneasy nature of the epistemological conclusions of quantum mechanics may be rectified under relational resolution. We conclude that any quantum relational interaction can be interpreted as a superposition of ”initial” states in ”space” and superposition of ”final” states in ”time”, and together they form a superposition in ”spacetime”. https://zenodo.org/records/18443875
